There are several existing technologies and accompanying applications for providing location services for home automation, namely physical sensors (motion, door), and "geofencing". Physical sensors offer a good amount of functionality but are limited to a narrow set of use cases. For instance, motion sensors may turn off the lights in a room where people are sitting still while watching TV or a movie, or may turn on lights frequently if a dog or cat is present in the home and wanders between rooms. Additionally, motion sensors or door sensors may not work well in large open floorplan rooms that are increasingly popular in homes these days, where multiple lighting zones may be desired. For example, many homes have kitchens, dining rooms, and TV rooms all combined into one large space, yet many users may not want to have every kitchen light on while watching TV. Also problematic is that physical sensors usually need to be plugged into a wall socket which may severely limit where they can be installed.


Another existing option is geofencing, wherein lighting can be controlled by the GPS location of a person's phone. This technology works well for coarse grained control (e.g., turning on all lights when arriving home for the day) but cannot reliably distinguish a users' location within a house. GPS is only accurate to about 6 feet, and can be useless inside of homes or apartment buildings. It would also have difficulty determining which floor of a home the user was on. Geofencing therefore would be very difficult or impossible to use to turn specific lighting zones on and off as a user walks between the rooms of their home.
 
There is also an existing app called Beecon that offers home automation services by way of combining iBeacons with GPS (http://www.beaconsandwich.com), somewhat similar to what we are suggesting. However, this service is limited in usage as it does not feature any method for accounting for multiple users. They do not have a cloud or local server. E.g., if a user leaves a zone, the Beecon app will turn off the lights, regardless of whether or not another user is in that zone. The Beecon app website indicates that it also does not advise that multiple iBeacon zones be used within a house, as it is not really capable of determining which zone a user is closer to out of multiple zones. Our application does feature the ability to discern between multiple iBeacons, so multiple zones are possible within a house. Our application also features a server which can track the locations of multiple users, setting lights for them both, unlike the Beecon app which can only handle a single user.


To summarize, there are no currently existing services that offer fine grained location based home automation for multiple users.
